> Oh foolish Mind!\
> Why do you go hither and thither in search of Brahman\
> when He is present in you?\
> Turn inward, and you will find Him there.\
> There is no greater fortune than this.\
> (Telugu Poem)

**Embodiments of love!**

God\'s creation is wonderful and mysterious. Spiritual aspirants undertake various sadhanas (spiritual disciplines) to have the vision of God. Each mantra is a combination of words with profound inner meanings. It has myriad meanings, but we have to take that which is suitable to our place and circumstances. The divine Dakshinamurthy gave inner meanings of these mantras for the benefit of seekers so that they could understand them easily and experience bliss. He taught the mantras to the world in a simple and lucid way. He laid special emphasis on three words representing jeeva (individual), deva (God), and manas (mind).

What is the role of mind which separates individual and God? God is the embodiment of chaitanya (consciousness). Mind is assigned the task of bringing together jada (inert) and chaitanya. Individual, God, and the mind in conjunction constitute a mantra. Jeeveswaraprakriti is the term used to describe these three.

The duty of mind lies in transforming individual into Divine. How does the mind perform this function? The individual is represented by the term vyashti, whereas God is the embodiment of samashti (society). Mind is a combination of vyashti and samashti. Hence, the mind is endowed with sacred power.

In this modern age, the mind is described as a mad monkey. It is not as mad a monkey as people believe. Mind represents mankind. It acts as a link between man and God. Hence, the mind is highly sacred and powerful. Manah eva manushyanam karanam bandhamokshayo (mind is responsible for both bondage and liberation of man). The power of mind is unique. But people have not grasped the greatness and grandeur of the mind and hence have not accorded due respect to it. They have not even understood the correct meaning of the word \"mind \" and are using it for trivial worldly tasks. The mind is very intense and has several facets. It is endowed with purity, valour, courage, etc. No one has been able to understand the nature and power of the mind. Without the mind, the terms jiva and deva will lose their significance. It is the mind that demonstrates the mighty power connecting the individual and God. One has to make efforts to understand the difference between mind, individual and the divinity therein.

As I told you yesterday, the mind represents Vishnu; the breath, Easwara; and the speech, Brahma. It is said that Brahma has emerged from the navel of Vishnu. Likewise, speech originates from the mind. Speech is endowed with immense power. The Vedas and the Upanishads contain many teachings, each consisting of three words. These words became mantras themselves. Not all can comprehend the essence of these mantras.

> Tat Twam Asi (That Thou Art)
>
> Ayam Atma Brahma (this Atma is verily Brahman)
>
> Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma (verily all this is Brahman)
>
> Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati (the knower of Brahman becomes Brahman).

All these teachings of the Upanishads are verily sacred mantras. Even the divine names, which appear as mere appellations are mantras. They can be interpreted in many ways.

There are four profound statements in each of the four Vedas \--the Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda, and Atharvana Veda. These give the very essence of the Vedas. Each mantra contains the essence of all the mantras. Hence, it is not necessary to know all the mantras and their meanings. Take for instance, Tat Twam Asi (That Thou Art) and Aham Brahmasmi (I am Brahman). When you enquire deeply, you can very clearly see that both mean the same. The mantra, Sarvam Khalvidam Brahma (All this is verily Brahman) also conveys the same truth. In this manner, all the mantras essentially proclaim the same truth. True spiritual practice lies in understanding this unity. Brahmavid Brahmaiva Bhavati (the knower of Brahman becomes Brahman himself). One who understands unity verily becomes God. This is the message of the Upanishads.

**Embodiments of Love!**

You are God. Understand this truth in the first instance. Every one is divine. Then, you may wonder where is the need to worship God? You have to worship Him till you understand and experience this unity. You are leading a very ordinary and worldly life. Such being the case, how can you understand the transcendental divine principle? You are Vyashtiswarupa (individual self), whereas God is Samashtiswarupa (Cosmic Form). Hence, it is not possible for vyashti to understand samashti. Neither spiritual practices nor chanting of the mantras can transform vyashti into samashti. Transformation is possible only when vyashti identifies himself with samashti. Vyashti should firmly believe, \"I am God \".

A potter collects clay from the river bank, mixes water in it, puts it on a wheel, and makes pots. The pot cannot hold water unless it undergoes agni samskara (refinement through fire). Just as a pot becomes strong when it is processed in fire, man becomes God when he undergoes refinement in the fire of wisdom. The pot that came from mud will ultimately disintegrate and become one with it. Likewise, every object and every being in this world will ultimately go back to its source of origin. A human being can be compared to a pot, and God is the potter. If the pot is not processed in fire of wisdom, it will break when put to use. What is wisdom? Advaita darshanam jnanam (perception of non-duality is wisdom). One should refine oneself in the fire of wisdom and experience non-dualism. Clay gains value when it is refined and made into a pot. The metal gold gains added value and strength when it is made into a beautiful ornament. Likewise, refinement manifests the latent power in man and increases his value.

God\'s Will is Vajra sankalpa. God is known as Hiranyagarbha (one with a golden womb). He is present in everyone. Since you are the embodiments of God, I address you as Bangaru (gold)! It is not enough if you merely have gold. It has to be made into an ornament. In order to make an ornament out of gold, you need to add a few metals, like copper and brass. Only then will gold become strong, heavy, and sturdy. Science students can easily understand this. The food that we eat contains many metals like gold, copper, and iron. Iron content is more in leafy vegetables. Tamarind and lemon preparations develop amla, which is the basic constituent in the formation of cells. In this manner, food strengthens our body.

The dreams that you experience are actually the reactions of your food and habits. There is an intricate and inseparable relationship between food, head, and God. Food plays a vital role in the spiritual path. When we consume the right kind of food, it helps us in our effort to understand Divinity. As is the food, so is the mind. Only one with pure mind can understand Divinity. In order to cultivate purity of mind, you should partake of sathwic (pure) food. You should consider food as God. It is said, Yad bhavam tad bhavati (as you think so you become).

If you consider food as mere padartha (matter), it will remain so. Depending on the feeling, it undergoes change. Take for instance, the magnetic power in the body. It gets transformed into electric power. It gives rise to sound energy and develops tejas (effulgence). Jewellery shines with added brilliance when it is polished. Likewise every man is endowed with tejas, which is known as Chaitanya shakti (power of consciousness).

If you enquire deeply, you can visualise God in every human being and in every material. Any padartha (matter) should not be looked upon as mere padartha. It should be considered as Parartha (the essence of Divinity). There is a gulf of difference between padartha and Parartha. Padartha corresponds to worldly matter, whereas Parartha is the transcendental divine principle. Since padartha is viewed as mere matter and not as Parartha, its value is demeaned. We attach value to that which has no real value. On the other hand, we do not value that which has to be valued most. The mind is responsible for all this. Hence, we have to purify the mind and focus it on Divinity. When the mind is focused on Divinity, our tejas also increases.

Today man is wasting his energy by entertaining bad thoughts and feelings. To keep bad thoughts in check, one has to develop divine thoughts. What are divine thoughts? You should consider everything as divine. Every drop of blood in your body is suffused with Divinity. Food generates blood and energy in the body. This divine energy has to be properly utilised by entertaining divine thoughts.

One cannot partake of paddy in its raw form. It has to be de-husked and refined into rice and then cooked well. Only then will it be fit for consumption. When paddy undergoes refinement and becomes rice, its value enhanced several fold. The process of refinement involves grinding, separating the husk, removing the dust, and polishing. In the same way, one cannot get happiness for the mere asking. One has to work for it. The more one engages in right works, the greater will be the reward. So, one should be prepared to work hard and get refined. Studying, eating, walking, sitting, running, smiling, and weeping \--all these constitute the process of refinement. How does weeping refine man? When one weeps, one gets rid of impure water.

The process of refinement lies in accepting that which is good and rejecting all that is bad. Consider our breathing process for example. We inhale oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide. Wherever a marriage function is held, people gather in large numbers, and hence more carbon dioxide is released polluting the atmosphere. Green leaves absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. That is whyour ancients used to decorate the venue of marriage with buntings of fresh mango leaves and plantain leaves.

Unfortunately, people have forgotten the inner significance of such sacred tradition. They decorate their houses with buntings of plastic leaves because they are long lasting and easy to procure. In the name of modernism, they are spoiling their health. They do not understand the sanctity of food. They adopt modern methods to prepare food and in the process waste a lot of money. Modernism has made them lazy. They are prepared to pay a rupee to a coolie to carry vegetables purchased for half a rupee. Such is the sorry state of affairs.

**Embodiments of Love!**

Consider food as Parartha (God) and not mere padartha (matter). Take care that the food that you eat helps you maintain good health. Do not consume stale food. It is like poison.

**Students!**

You are not putting into practice what you are studying. You have learnt that the combination of hydrogen and oxygen results in water. But how far is it useful in your daily life? What is the use of doing experiments in the laboratory if people are not benefited by it? Today, people in several places are suffering from water scarcity. Is it possible to mix hydrogen and oxygen and provide them water? No. There are many rivers in Bharat (India), but what is the use? Their waters are flowing into the ocean without being properly utilised. Today different States are engaged in conflicts with each other over the water issue. Why don\'t they make proper use of the water available? Make proper use of the rivers that are flowing in Bharat. Bharat is a highly sacred and prosperous land. It has earned the appellation Annapurna (land of plenty of food). But today, people of Bharat are suffering for want of food. What is the reason? People are misusing the available resources. If you put them to proper use, you as well as your fellowman can be happy.

**Embodiments of Love!**

Do not waste anything. Even while washing their hands; some people open the taps too much and in the process much water gets wasted. Wastage of water really pains Me. Don\'t waste water; don\'t waste food.

Many people in the world are dying of hunger. Hence, instead of wasting food, give it to those who are in dire need of it. There are some who resort to escapist sophistry, saying that the food they throw will not be wasted because dogs would feed on it. Even dogs would not touch such food because it would be in a completely spoiled state. In this modern age, not only human beings, but even animals are very intelligent. They decide to eat or not to eat it only after sniffing at it.

Don\'t waste food, time, energy and water. Understand that time is very important. Time wasted is life wasted. Yesterday, I spoke to you at length on various topics. Since I am speaking everyday, My voice is becoming louder and clearer. It only shows that when you speak good words, you will get more strength. Do not indulge in unnecessary talk. Speak to the extent needed. Don\'t waste your word. If you talk loudly, it amounts to wasting your word. Only those for whom they are meant should hear your words. There are some who talk very loudly even while walking on the road. Nobody will respect such people. You have to uphold your self-respect and manifest it by your speech and conduct. Na sreyo niyamam vina (without discipline, there can be no welfare).

Why do I walk slowly? It is only to give you darshan for more time. I can walk much faster, but I don\'t like to do it because if I walk slowly all of you can have My darshan to your heart\'s content. I am happy when you are happy. I walk slowly only to make you happy. Students! Do not talk without restraint. You will earn the respect of others only when you respect your words. You may study well and get good marks but that is not enough. You should develop self-confidence and follow the dictates of your conscience. When you satisfy your conscience, you will certainly attain an exalted position in life.

Abraham Lincoln was born in a poor family. In his childhood, he did not have even proper food to eat. His dresses were torn and dirty. His fellow students hailing from rich families used to make fun of his dress. Lincoln could not bear the humiliation any longer. One day, he came back from school crying. When his mother questioned, he said his classmates were making fun of his poverty. He wanted a pair of new clothes to be stitched for him. His mother consoled him saying, \"Son, let others say what they want. You respect all. Do not hate anybody. Understand our family position and act accordingly. With our meagre income, we cannot afford to buy a new dress for you. Keep your dress neat and clean. Develop self-confidence. Uphold your self-respect. \" The words of his mother made an indelible impression on the tender heart of Lincoln. He followed his mother\'s teachings and ultimately became the President of America. He could occupy such an exalted position because of his self-confidence. He respected all.

I give you My own example. When I was studying in 3rd standard and 4th standard, I had only one pair of shorts and shirt. I could not afford to give them to dhobi for washing and ironing. Everyday, after returning from school, I would wear a towel and wash My clothes. I used to put live embers in a small metal container and use it for ironing. Later on, I had two pairs of dresses for the whole year. Whenever Pedda Venkama Raju enquired whether I needed a new dress, I used to say, \"I have enough number of dresses. I don\'t need anything. \" I did not want to waste money. Misuse of money is evil. In those days, a pair of shorts and a shirt cost only a few annas. Yet I never used to ask for them.

I always used to do My work Myself. Even now, I do My work Myself. People may think that Swami is having a number of servants to do His work. Nobody need to serve nor do I expect any service from others. Since My childhood, I respected all. Today the whole world is respecting Me. As I told you the other day, when you love and respect all, you will be loved and respected by all. Love everybody irrespective of caste, language, religion and nationality. Then God will shower His love on you. The more you serve others with the spirit of sacrifice, the greater will be the reward.

Modern students lack goodness. They are not concerned about their parents. They wear all types of fancy dress and roam about in the streets. Students should develop humility and give respect to others. You should not talk to elders in a disrespectful manner. First of all, learn to respect everyone. If you want to attain good name, your conduct should be good. Today the whole world respects Me because I respect everyone. I address devotees as Bangaru and talk to them lovingly. Likewise, you too should learn to talk in a pleasing manner. Lincoln faced acute poverty and yet could come up in life because of his humility and self-confidence. Emulate his ideal. Be satisfied with what you have. Do not entertain excessive desires.

**Students!**

Many sacred teachings are contained in the Upanishads. Put them into practice and earn a good name for yourself. You need not become great, it is enough if you are good.

Bhagawan concluded His discourse with the bhajan, \"Hari Bhajan Bina Sukha Santhi Nahin\".
